
[Transcriber’s Note:

This e-text includes characters that require UTF-8 (Unicode) file
encoding, primarily accented Greek:

  Εὔγαμοι, δείπνῳ ταχέως ἕκαστος

If any of these characters do not display properly, or if the
apostrophes and quotation marks in this paragraph appear as garbage,
make sure your text reader’s “character set” or “file encoding” is set
to Unicode (UTF-8). You may also need to change the default font. As a
last resort, use the Latin-1 version of the file instead.

Typographical errors are listed at the end of the e-text.]




ΧΗΝῼΔΙΑ.


  [Bookplate:
  1650. SIGILL: COLL: HARVARD: CANTAB: NOV: ANGL:
  The Gift of
  Jacob Bigelow, M.D.,
  of Boston.
  (H. U. 1806)
  13 Nov. 1871.]




  Harvard College Library--
  from Dr. Bigelow--




  ΧΗΝῼΔΙΑ

  or

  THE CLASSICAL MOTHER GOOSE.


Argutos inter strepere anser olores.

  By
  Jacob Bigelow


  CAMBRIDGE:
  _Printed_ (_Not Published_):
  University Press.
  1871.




  1871, Nov. 13
  Gift of
  Jacob Bigelow, M.D. LL.D.
  of Boston.
  (H. U. 1806.)


  University Press: Welch, Bigelow, & Co.,
  Cambridge.




PREFACE.


The work familiarly known as “Mother Goose’s Melodies” has the dignity
of being already an undoubted classic among the most incipient
cultivators of literature in the United States. It is a compilation
taken mostly from “Gammer Gurton’s Garland” or the “Nursery Parnassus,”
an English child’s book about a century old, of which various editions
have been published in London, Glasgow, and other places. It is stated
in one of its late prefaces that it was originally issued at Stockton
in a small twopenny brochure, without date, printed by and for
R. Christopher. Sir Harris Nicholas says it appeared in the year
1783. The American “Mother Goose” contains many interpolated articles
indigenous in the Western hemisphere, which are of various, and some
even of doubtful merit.

In England, the “Arundines Cami,” the “Sabrinæ Corolla,” and other
representative works of distinguished seminaries, have occasionally
drawn on “Gammer Gurton” for materials of their classic versions. These
versions are sometimes stately in their prosodial exactness, and at
other times as playfully loose as the original English ditties first
set to rhyme by Gurton and afterwards copied by Goose.[A]

The _Chenodia_, now first printed, an experiment for the author’s own
amusement, partly in classic verse of various metres, partly in mediæval
and unclassic rhyme, and partly, like the original English, in no metre
at all, is tendered as an offset for any disparagement of the dead
languages contained in two essays read in 1865 and 1866, at a time when
classical studies were paramount in Harvard University and other
colleges of the United States.

  J. B.


    [Footnote A: There appears to be some reason for believing that
    at least a century before Gammer Gurton’s works were published in
    England, a bodily “Mother Goose” was at work on the other side of
    the Channel. In Scott’s novel of “Woodstock,” chapter 28, Charles
    II., then a fugitive, says: “It reminds me, like half the things
    I meet with in this world, of the ‘Contes de Commère l’Oye.’” Not
    having been able to obtain a sight of “Commère l’Oye,” we must
    leave the original claim for authorship as a field for future
    controversy.]




CONTENTS.

                                PAGE

  Sprattus et Uxor                 9
  Par Avium                       10
  Rex Arthurus                    11
  Mors Turdo-Galli                12
  Puer Cæruleus                   13
  Vetula Calceocola               14
  Canis Kevensis                  14
  Diccora Dogium                  15
  Thomæ Quadrijugæ                16
  Homunculus et Puellula          17
  Bopipias                        20
  Advenæ Mendici                  20
  Lunicola                        21
  Magi Gothamenses                22
  Jackus et Jilla                 23
  Felis in Fidibus                24
  Grumbo Gigas                    25
  Miles Redux                     26
  Ansercula                       27
  Labor et Cura                   28




CHENODIA.


SPRATTUS ET UXOR.

  Jack Spratt could eat no fat,
  His wife could eat no lean,
  And so between them both
  They licked the platter clean.

    Sprattus horrescens adipem recusat,
    Uxor et non vult tolerare macrum:
    Conjuges digni! potuêre sic de-
          tergere lancem.

      Σπράττος ὠμηστὴς στέαρ ἐξέλειπεν‧
      Ἡ γυνὴ σφοδρῶς ἀπέφευγεν ἰσχνόν‧
      Εὔγαμοι, δείπνῳ ταχέως ἕκαστος
                Πάντ’ ἀπολείχει.


PAR AVIUM.

  Two little birds were sitting on a stone,
  One flew away and then there was one,
  T’ other flew away and then there was none,
  So the poor stone was left all alone.

  One of the little birds back again flew,
  In came t’ other and then there were two;
  Says one bird to t’ other, “How do you do?”
  “Very well, I thank you; pray how do you?”

    Fama est par avium venisse insistere saxo,
    Quarum primâ abeunte superstitit inde secunda:
    Illa autem fugiens jam vix vestigia liquit,
    Et saxum mœrens in campo luget inani.

    Ecce autem rediens avium comparuit una,
    Altera non segnis sociam complectitur almam:
    Arreptâque manu, “Quid agis dulcissima rerum?”
    “Suaviter ut nunc est, et jam cupio omnia quæ vis.”


REX ARTHURUS.

  When King Arthur ruled the land,
    He ruled it like a king:
  He bought four pecks of barley-meal
    To make a brave pudding.

  A pudding brave the king did make
    And stuffed it well with plums;
  Great lumps of suet he put into it,
    As big as both his thumbs.

  The king and queen partook thereof,
    And all the court beside;
  And what they did not eat that night,
    The queen next morning fried.

    Angliæ rex imperio potitus,
    Hordei nactus modium farinæ,
    Ordinat cœnâ properè institutâ
                Sternere mensam.

    Mira farrago exoritur culinâ,
    Turgidis uvis maculata passis
    Intus et frustis adipis referta
                Pollicis instar.

    Rex et affines epulantur omnes
    Principes magni dominæque lectæ:
    Alma regina exoriente luce
                Fragmina frixit.


MORS TURDO-GALLI.

  Who killed Cock Robin?
    I, says the sparrow;
    With my bow and arrow,
  I killed Cock Robin.


    Quis Turdo-gallum necavit?
      En, adsum qui feci,
      Qui telum conjeci;
      Jaculis et arcu
      Passer interfeci.


PUER CÆRULEUS.

  Little Boy Blue, come blow your horn,
  The cow’s in the meadow, the sheep in the corn.
  Where’s the little boy that looks after the sheep?
  Under the haycock fast asleep.

    Cœrule parve puer, cornu nunc suscipe cantum.
    Per segetes errant pecudes, per pascua vaccæ.
    Ah, ubi nunc ovium custos tam parvulus absit?
    En, gregis oblitus sub fœno dormit opaco.


VETULA CALCEOCOLA.

  There was an old woman who lived in a shoe,
  Who had so many children she didn’t know what to do;
  She gave them some broth without any bread,
  And whipt them all soundly and sent them to bed.

    Calceus inclusit vetulam turbamque suorum,
    Multum quæ luctans natos compescuit arctos;
    Jus illis profert oblita apponere panem,
    Verberibusque datis dormitum sæva remittit.


CANIS KEVENSIS.

  I am his Highness’s dog at Kew.
  Pray tell me, sir, whose dog are you?

    Principis excelsi coram canis ecce Kevensis.
    Dic mihi vicissim quæso cujus canis es tu?


DICCORA DOGIUM.

  Dickory dickory dock,
  The mouse ran up the clock,
  The clock struck one,
  The mouse ran down,
  Dickory dickory dock.

    Diccora diccora dogium,
    Ascendit mus horologium.
        Insonuit hora,
        Fugit mus sine morâ,
    Diccora diccora dogium.

      Δίκκορα δίκκορα δόγιον
      Ἀνέβη μῦς εἰς ὡρολόγιον·
          Ἕν! ὥρα ἔφη·
          Ὁ δὲ μῦς κατέβη.
      Δίκκορα δίκκορα δόγιον.

      Ἄρχετε Δικκορικᾶς μοῖσαι φίλαι ἄρχετ’ ἀοιδᾶς.
      Ἠγέρθη ποθ’ ὕραξ, ἀνέβη δ’ εἰς ὡρολογητήν‧
      Κώδωνος φθογγὸν δεινὸν κατέφευγε φοβηθείς.
      Λήγετε Δικκορικᾶς μοῖσαι ἴτε λήγετ’ ἀοιδᾶς.


THOMÆ QUADRIJUGÆ.

  Tom’s coach and six, whither in such haste going?
  But a short journey, to his own undoing.

    Quadrijugis Thomas quo nunc se proripit ille?
    Abiit in celerem--brevis est via, nota--ruinam.


HOMUNCULUS ET PUELLULA.

      There was a little man,
      And he wooed a little maid,
  And he said, Little maid, will you wed wed wed?
      I have little more to say,
      Then will you ay or nay,
  For the least said is soonest mended ded ded.

    Homunculus eximius puellulam amavit,
    Quam ut nubendam duceret sic ore compellavit:
    Quid verbis opus pluribus? Dic _volo_, dicve _nolo_,
    Sat verbum sapientibus: responde sine dolo.

      Then the little maid replied,
      “Should I be your little bride,
  Pray, what shall we have for to eat eat eat?
      Will the flame that you are rich in
      Make a fire in the kitchen,
  Or the little god of love turn the spit spit spit?”

    Responsum dat puellula,--Si flectar ad nubendum
    Dic, quæso, quid cibarii habebimus edendum?
    Amorem credis ignem in culinâ servaturum,
    Aut parvulum Cupidinem jam veru versaturum?

      Then the little man replied,
      And, they say, a little sighed,
  For his little heart was big with sorrow sorrow sorrow,
      “My offers are but small,
      But you have my little all;
  And what we haven’t got we must borrow borrow borrow.”

    Replicuit homunculus suspiriis convulsus,
    Ingenti ægritudine cor parvulum perculsus,
    Non multa quidem profero, sed omnia relinquo;
    Et quicquid nobis deerit petemus a propinquo.

      The little man thus spoke;
      His heart was almost broke;
  And all for the sake of her charms charms charms.
      So the little maid relented,
      And softened she consented
  The little man to take to her arms arms arms.

    Sic fatur ille lacrymans ex corde desolato,
    Et propter pulchritudinem ad mortem vulnerato.
    Mollitur tum puellula, amorem et agnovit,
    Beatumque homunculum amplexu suo fovit.


BOPIPIAS.

      Little Bo Peep has lost her sheep,
  And couldn’t tell where to find ’em.
      Let ’em alone, and they’ll come home,
  And bring their tails behind ’em.

    Parvula Bopipias amissos quæritat agnos,
      Nec reperire locum quo latuêre potest.
    Desine, Bopipias, redeuntes nocte videbis,
      Caudasque incolumes post sua crura ferent.


ADVENÆ MENDICI.

  Hark, hark, the dogs do bark,
  The beggars have come to town;
  Some in rags and some in jags,
  And some in velvet gowns.

        En! cum canum latratu,
        Et multo ululatu;
    Veniunt mendici repentes,
        Egeni, pannosi,
        Squalentes, exosi,
    Vel sericas togas gerentes.


LUNICOLA.

  The man in the moon came down at noon,
    Inquiring the way to Norwich.
  The man of the South has burnt his mouth,
    Eating cold milk porridge.

    Lunicola, meridie, ad terram descendebat,
    Et viam ad Norvicum assidue quærebat.
    Australis vir ineptus est et os excoriavit,
    Dum lacteum perfrigidum incontinens voravit.


MAGI GOTHAMENSES.

  Three wise men of Gotham
  Went to sea in a bowl.
  If the bowl had been stronger,
  My song had been longer.

    Tres magi Gothamenses
    In scypho mare tranant
    Si cymba secura,
    Canenda sint plura.

    Cives tres docti Gothamenses æquora verrunt,
      Crater et fragilis corpora obesa vehit.
    Mox en tempestas, surguntque ad sidera fluctus.
      Musa dolens casum nunc memorare nequit.


JACKUS ET JILLA.

      Jack and Jill
      Went up the hill,
  To draw a pail of water;
      Jack fell down
      And broke his crown,
  And Jill came tumbling after.

        Jackus cum Jillâ
        Formosâ ancillâ,
    Aquam hauriturus collem ascendebat;
        Prolabitur Jackus,
        Caput miserè fractus,
    Et Jilla desperata in fatum ruebat.


FELIS IN FIDIBUS.

  Heigh diddle diddle,
  The cat and the fiddle,
  The cow jumped over the moon.
    The little dog laughed
    To see such a craft,
  And the dish ran away with the spoon.

      Hidideldelis,
      In fidibus felis,
    Super lunam vacca saltavit.
      Tum risit canicula,
      Visâ re tam ridiculâ,
    Et lanx cochleare raptavit.


GRUMBO GIGAS.

  Fee! faw! fum!
  I smell the blood of an Englishman.
  Dead or alive, I will have some.

    Fe! fau! fum!
    Sanguinem odoror Anglicum.
    Seu vivum seu mortuum,
    Bibendum est mihi aliquantum.

      Φῆ! φοῦ! φῶν!
      Αἵματος ὀσφραίνομαι τῶν Ἄγγλων·
      Ἢ νεκρὸν ἢ ζῶν
      Χαίρησω πίνων.


MILES REDUX.

  Who comes here?
    A Grenadier.
  What do you want?
    A pot of beer.
  Where’s your money?
    I’ve forgot.
  Get you gone,
    You drunken sot.

    Heus! Quis illic?
      Ductor militiæ.
    Quid petis hic?
      Cantharum cervisiæ.
    Ubi moneta?
      Loqueris oblito.
    O, ebriose,
      In malum abito.


ANSERCULA.

  Goosey goosey gander,
  Where shall you wander?
  Up stairs, down stairs,
  In my lady’s chamber.

    Ansercula vagula, blandula,
    Quæ nunc abibis in loca?
    Sursum, deorsum,
    In dominæ cubiculum.


LABOR ET CURA.

  Double double,
  Toil and trouble.
  Fire burn and
  Caldron bubble.

    Ingeminat labor,
    Ingeminante curâ,
    Cum flamma ardescit,
    Aqua ebullitura.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Handwriting:

The following were written by hand in the original. The bookplate and
the title page are definitely by the same person; the others are less
certain. 1806 was Jacob Bigelow’s Harvard graduation year.

  Bookplate: Text beginning “The Gift of...”

  “Harvard College Library,
  from Dr. Bigelow--”

  Title Page: “By / Jacob Bigelow”

  Entire “Gift of...” section, ending with parenthesized “H. U. 1806”


Errata (noted by transcriber)

  Σπράττος ὠμηστὴς στέαρ ἐξέλειπεν‧  [printed ἐξελείπὲν]
  PUER CÆRULEUS / Cœrule parve puer  [inconsistent spelling unchanged]
  The man of the South has burnt his mouth,  [. for ,]
  Fee! faw! fum!
    [hand-written correction “f/” in margin: third “f” is damaged so it
    looks like “r” or “i”]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Chenodia, by Jacob Bigelow

